---
layout:     post
title:      "Present pieties"
baselink:   /piety
permalink:  /piety
date:       2015-06-04
author:     Gavin

visible:    1
published:  true

summary:    What's the spirit of the age? What does everyone have to like?
quality:    6
importance: 4
emotion:    7
confidence: 90% that most of the rich world feels obliged to these things.
wordcount:  2100
categories: social-science, criticism
argument:   piety/argument.html
---

{%	include piety/links.md		%}


<blockquote>...one knows a piety from a principle because even those who oppose a piety have to pretend to honour its core point.
</blockquote>
<center><p style="line-height: 5px;">– <a href="{{gop}}">Adam Gopnik</a>  </p></center>
<br>

<blockquote>
...<i>one way you know that something is an institution is that you don’t have to give reasons for it. Getting a college degree, like getting married, is what people do.</i>
</blockquote>
<center><p style="line-height: 5px;">– <a href="{{emer}}">John Emerson</a></p>
</center>
<br /><br>

What does everyone <i>have</i> to like? (Better: what does everyone <a href="{{pref}}"><i>say</i></a> they like, in the West, if they're respectable?) By construction, most people don't like the things hipsters like. What do <i>even hipsters</i> fail to react against?

<!-- Two people saying they don't like things you're supposed to: Nassim Taleb refuses to read the news, for <a href="{{aest}}">aesthetic</a> and <a href="{{epis}}">epistemic</a> reasons; Pierre Bayard says that one can and should talk about books one hasn't read. Good intellectuals aren't supposed to talk like this.<br /><br /> -->

Not everything in the following list is bad, just mysteriously universal or <a href="{{x}}">unquestioned</a>. I also wanted things independent of Left/Right politics, because they are both obvious and plainly not universal. So I haven't included Gopnik's example (gay marriage) despite it having all the hallmarks of a piety – e.g. finding support even among <a href="{{nat}}">ancient enemies</a>, having <a href="{{ag}}">only</a> <a href="{{wut}}">confusing opponents</a> we could report on, gawkily. 

They're also superficial in comparison to the deadly pieties, 'things one <a href="{{eich}}">loses one's job</a> for opposing'. For which 'heresy' might not be excessive. Though that takes our term for 'things others will <a href="{{heb}}">kill you for saying </a>'.
<br><br>

<div class="accordion">
	<h3>Update (2020)</h3>
	<div>
		To my surprise there has been some movement. It is now <i>much</i> more common to be sceptical of the media (the "MSM" boogeyman), though of course most non-mainstream sources are no better. (<a href="{{alys}}">Alyssa Vance</a>: "<i>Sometimes the media is lying to you. Unfortunately, people who say 'the media is lying to you' are, on average, lying to you even more."</i>.) Data journalism has grown and had at least a tiny effect on the great rivers of groundless nonsense.<br><br> 
		<!--  -->
		One piety I missed, which was present in 2015 but has gotten much worse, is the entire world <b>Obsessively Following the US National Election Cycle</b> for one-quarter of their entire lives. Given how impotent the audience is to do literally anything about it but panic, and how low-quality almost all of the coverage is, this is self-harm on a very grand scale.
	</div>
</div>


<br>


{%	include piety/journ.md		%}

{%	include piety/trav.md		%}

{%	include piety/nat.md		%}

{%	include piety/net.md		%}

{%	include piety/ed.md		%}

<!-- 	include piety/finance.md		%} -->


{%	include piety/read.md		%}

<br>

<hr />

<br>

### How does this happen?

Well, as I've conceded, each of them has some intrinsic appeal. But that aside: herding and signalling is the boring but probably most important component. Then there's marketing, which I actually don't see as that powerful. Preference falsification is cool but requires some great force that makes everyone lie without co-ordinating the lie. 

Each of the above sustain an identity in their host. And once a practice gets into your identity, it can extract a huge amount from you, without you ever thinking to complain. It may seem far-fetched that someone could identify with their consumption of journalism, but behold the Extremely Online, the politics wonks, the amateur pundits on a million radio call-ins, all over the earth. 

<br>

> A time is marked not so much by ideas that are argued about as by ideas that are taken for granted.<br />The character of an era hangs upon what needs no defense. Power runs with ideas that only the crazy would draw into doubt.<br />The "taken for granted" is the test of sanity; "what everyone knows" is the line between us and them."

- Lawrence Lessig 

<br>

### See also

* [Liam Bright](https://sootyempiric.blogspot.com/2022/02/our-time-comprehended-in-thought.html) on the link between neoliberalism (yes, really) and identitarianism.

<br><br><br>


