---
layout:     post
title:      "You do you"
baselink:   /you
permalink:  /you
date:       2017-08-12
author:     Gavin

published:  true
visible:    1

summary:    All advice has someone who needs to hear the opposite.
confidence: N/A
categories: self-help, rationality
quality:    6
importance: 5
wordcount:  800
---

Out at London Pride, uncharacteristically. Around 1am, as you do, find myself in an intimate discussion with a stranger. Who leaps to what he imagines is my defence:<br><br>


<div style="padding-left:5%">

  <p>He: "<i>What are you into?</i>"</p>
  <p>I: "Women, mostly."</p>
  <p>"<i>Oh right.</i>" </p>
  <p>"It's a limited view, though. I wish I was more open."</p>
  <p>"<i>What? There's no such </i>thing<i>! You got to accept yourself!</i>"</p>
  <p>"Sure, but - I'm only attracted to like a tenth of the population; it would be objectively better to have a larger pool, and to see all of beauty."</p>
  <p>"<i>Hey, </i>hey<i>: stop it, you don't need to justify yourself. You are you, so you do </i>you<i>. Don't do anyone else.</i>"</p>
  <p>"That's a beautiful thing to say, and there's a lot of people in the world who really need to hear it. Not me, though."</p>
  <p>"<i>It's true for everyone! You'll only hurt yourself by not being yourself.</i>"</p>
  <p>"No, though. Consider: monkeys like bananas and sex; humans like bananas, sex, <i>and</i> philosophy and sports. So the value space visible to the latter is -"</p>
  <p>"<i>- Look, you're not going to change by overthinking things. So skip it! I'm not questioning you!</i>"</p>
  <p>"I am questioning myself. And so I often change. I don't want stock acceptance. Challenging me when I am not as good as I could be is better than acceptance: you take me seriously. You give me actual help.</p>
  <p> When I 'do' me, I justify myself to myself. In others this can be neurotic, self-sabotage. For me it is creation. If you wanted to google it, there's a word for it. Only at home when taking a pickaxe to the walls, to see if they're actually solid."</p>

</div>

<br><br>



<br><br>



