---
layout:     post
title:      "Is whey ok?"
baselink:   /whey
permalink:  /whey
date:       2021-11-22
author:     Gavin   
img:        

visible:    1
published:  false

summary:    Estimate of the moral harm of whey powder.
quality:    
confidence: 
importance: 
emotion: 	
warnings: 	
wordcount:  
categories: 
argument:	
---


I'm vegan. But I'm a confusing sort. It's not putting animal products in your mouth that does the damage, it's paying for them.

If I had a stronger stomach, this means there's nothing wrong with eating discarded meat.

https://www.jefftk.com/p/how-bad-is-dairy


"1 cup of low-fat milk contains 8.53 grams of protein, of which 18% is whey protein, implying that 1 cup of milk contains ~1.54g whey protein. So to get 25g of whey protein (the recommended dose for a standard Power Smoothie) would require about 16 cups of milk (25/1.54), or about 2000 calories at 124 calories per cup. That means that if a cow produces 17,640,000 calories’ worth of milk over the course of its life, it produces the equivalent of ~8700 scoops of whey protein powder, assuming that the protein is isolated perfectly. This would imply that having one Power Smoothie a day for 24 years would account for one cow."

"While this estimate does assume perfect isolation of protein, it’s also worth noting that whey is a by-product of cheese production, i.e., the other parts of the milk are used too and may actually be in more demand than the parts used to make whey protein powder. Thus, I think this estimate is more likely to overstate than understate the impact of whey protein powder consumption, and overall I’d be surprised if anyone could consume enough Power Smoothie in their lifetime to account for 2 cows (at a few Power Smoothies a week currently, I doubt that I will account for 1). Contrast this with chicken, in which it might only take 3-4 chicken-heavy meals to account for one chicken’s life."

Lewis Bollard: "You should change from comparing “calories per life,” which is hugely skewed by lifespans — 4-6 years for a dairy cow vs. 35-55 days for a broiler chicken — to “calories per day.” (Assuming you agree with me that suffering, not lives lost, is what matters.) For dairy cows, that would be about 15,000 calories/day (avg. 6.5 gallons of milk/cow/day * 8.5lbs per gallon * 272 calories per lb of whole milk — these are conservative numbers; some stats put gallons/day higher). (3) Given that whey seems to be either as in demand, or less in demand than, other parts of the milk, it seems to make sense to just count the calories of the whey (assuming the other calories in the milk will be used for cheese etc.). (Note these numbers assume that the whey protein concentrate provides the same average value per calorie to producers as other components of milk. I haven’t found great numbers breaking down the relative value of cheese and whey sales to cheese producers, who produce whey as a byproduct. But within the whey market, the prices for “Dry Whey Central” (used for humans) and “Dry Whey Animal Feed” are surprisingly similar. This suggests that human use whey protein is not disproportionately profitable to dairy producers, though that could change if demand surged since whey protein concentrate supply is limited by the inefficient process used to produce it.) The power smoothie requires 25g of whey protein, which is 100 calories (just from the protein — presumably they soup it up with fat and sugar from non-dairy sources, so not counting those). That implies each power smoothie contributes to just 1/150th of a cow’s daily milk output. I.e. if you have a power smoothie every day for a year, you’ll only be responsible for 2.4 days of a cow’s life on the farm, and if you have a smoothie every day for the next 30 years, you’ll only be responsible for 70 days of a cow’s life.  (4) If the contribution to demand is really this low, I think the other aspects of the dairy industry are pretty irrelevant. My understanding is that the average dairy cow is kept for about 3.6 births, and the replacement rate is just over 1 because mortality is low, so perhaps 2.5 calves are killed near birth per cow over its 4-6 year commercial lifespan. So if you drank power smoothies every day for 30 years, you’d only be responsible for about 1/10th of a calf getting killed. Hope this is all good news!"