---
layout:     post
title:      "Punk in Drublic"
baselink:   /nofx
permalink:  /nofx
date:       2022-09-26
author:     Gavin   
img:        /img/

visible:    1
published:  false

summary:    
quality:    
emotion:    
confidence: 
importance: 
wordcount:  
categories: subculture, music
---

NOFX's 1994 album _Punk in Drublic_ is a work of moral imagination. More than many novels.

## 1. 'Linoleum'

The people who subsist. Not quite homeless, not quite unemployed. Beachcombers, can collectors, buskers.




[Other songs](https://genius.com/Nofx-leave-it-alone-lyrics) are the usual impressionistic punk, which give the impression of critique and meaning without saying anything. (Music doesn't have to have a proposition or a narrative, but I'm struck by how much of these) 

## Don't Call Me White

> I can accept responsibility for what I've done<br>
But not for who I am

> _I ain't a part of no conspiracy, I'm just your average Joe_

> Represents everything I hate<br>
The soap shoved in your mouth to cleanse the mind<br>

Against identity politics, collective punishment.

I once went to a comedy gig, [Kamau Bell](https://www.wkamaubell.com/blog/tag/I%27m+white+and+I%27m+proud). He unsuccessfully attempted to get the pallard Edinburgh crowd to chant "I'm white and I'm proud", his point being that good people need to reclaim the practice from the nazis, because then there will be proper regulation of the negative element.

Later we see that it's not just a paean to actual liberalism -- there's also an attempt to claim spicy white status. (Punks were more remarked upon and disdained than say black middle-class professionals.)

> A vast majority of sheep<br>
A buttoned collar, starched and bleached<br>
Constricting veins, the blood flow to the brain slows<br>
They're so fucking ordinary white, [so] don't call me white

<br>


## 'The Brews' (subverting Jewish stereotypes)

## 'Lori Meyers' (a stab at the sex-work question)



## 'Happy Guy'

Their greatest song. They try to imagine the comfort and ontological security of a faith they themselves will never have.


## Bonus: 'The Decline'

https://afterallitcouldbeworse.blogspot.com/2013/06/the-decline-1999-by-nofx.html