---
layout:     post
title:      "Ramsey"
baselink:   /frank
permalink:  /frank
date:       2021-01-31
author:     Gavin   
img:        /img/

visible:    1
published:  false
quality:    6

summary:    
confidence: 
importance: 
wordcount:  
categories:	longtermism, greats, philosophy
---

What Berto calls "the counterfactual greatest philosopher of the 20th Century".

Even massive nerds haven't heard of him. I just polled my philosophy degree mates, and only two of them had heard of him, and only then because of his association with the Cult Wittgenstein.

Achievements

- foundational result in Ramsey theory
- groundwork in __[extremal graph theory](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Extremal_graph_theory)__.
- Moral discount rate is zero

- ### Local valence, pragmatism, fun
    - "My picture of the world is drawn in perspective, and not like a model to scale. The foreground is occupied by human beings and the stars are all as small as threepenny bits. … I apply my perspective not merely to space but also to time. In time the world will cool and everything will die; but that is a long time off still, and its present value at compound discount is almost nothing. 
    - Nor is the present less valuable because the future will be blank. Humanity, which fills the foreground of my picture, I find interesting and on the whole admirable. I find, just now at least, the world a pleasant and exciting place. 
    - You may find it depressing; I am sorry for you, and you despise me. But [the world] is not in itself good or bad; it is just that it thrills me but depresses you. On the other hand, I pity you with reason, because it is pleasanter to be thrilled than to be depressed, and not merely pleasanter but better for all one’s activities."
- It feels right to call him Frank, where we would never call Wittgenstein "Ludwig" (let alone Lucki) or even Russell "Bertrand".

## Misak
- His instincts, in all parts of his life, were straightforward and directed to the facts.
- Roy Harrod: "[Ramsey's] intellectual process is at white heat; but the style is delightfully cool, like that of some old naturalist taking one for a ramble in the country and making desultory observations."
- He is sporty despite being ungainly and hyperintellectual. Heroic

### Winchester
    - The seventy scholarship boys lived in a damp and cold fourteenth-century building. The chambers were unheated—central heating was installed only in 1987, after the students built a snowman inside one of the chambers and it stayed intact for the duration of the term. Freezing morning baths, quickly in-and-out, were not optional.
    - The war had a deleterious effect on the food, which at Winchester was at the best of times awful. Its quality had been known to give rise to correspondence in The Times... Once they were given boiled rhubarb leaves as a vegetable, only to discover the next day that they could have died from eating them... The boys who couldn’t buy food from the school shop were always hungry.
    - [Interesting that the "scholars" [scholarship boys] were higher status than the "commoners" [fee-paying] ]

> The primary issue was the length of the day, which officially started at 6:45 in the morning and went straight through to 8:45 in the evening. Lessons began at 7 am, and late risers did without their cup of tea and two weevily biscuits. But the junior boys had a much more arduous time of it than the official story let on. As one of the youngest, it was Frank’s duty to get up at the first sound of the bell at 6 am and ‘call’ or wake up the dormitory.
        - Frank took life seriously and did not like being made fun of
        - The police themselves went out on strikes during 1918–19. A revolutionary socialism now seemed a real possibility.
        - Charlie would no doubt turn in his grave if he knew that the only reason anyone still reads his history of the Wilson family is to find out about those two left-wing nephews.
        - "The reason people say this is the happiest time of one’s life is simply that... most people for e.g. Foot will never again possess despotic power as he does now. He can be witness judge and executioner all in one; he can abuse juniors as he will never-again be able to abuse people . . . He can go about imagining he is upholding the foundations of College and talk rot about prefectorial dignity and people being above themselves and can beat people as he did Asquith for being ‘solitary’."
    - ### Cambridge
        - "We really live in a great time for thinking"
        - He would become the singular mind who could engage each of those
great thinkers—Keynes, Russell, Moore, Wittgenstein—on their own terms. There would be simply no one else who could do that, including these four themselves. At the least, Keynes and Moore weren’t up to Russell’s logical skills and Wittgenstein, Russell, and Moore weren’t up to Keynes’s skill in economics.
