---
layout:     post
title:      "To be led out"
baselink:   /horses
permalink:  /horses
date:       2022-09-15
author:     Gavin   
img:        /img/

visible:    1
published:  true

summary:    What passed for intellection
quality:    3
emotion:    7
confidence: 
importance: 1
wordcount:  
categories: art, becoming, meaning, poem, literature
---

_One of the few moments of actual education in my 13 years in Scottish schools._

<br>

Edwin Muir is one of Scotland's canonised primitives. He moved from Orkney to a miserable Glasgow tenement and, almost immediately, his whole family died. In a characteristic lapse of the imagination, he concluded that nothing better than Victorian immiseration and filth was possible along the modern road, and fled. Being anti-industry is simply good taste among poets and other attempted intellectuals; English class is largely reserved for anti-modern sentiment.

The class was reading aloud his "[Horses](https://allpoetry.com/poem/8496359-The-Horses-by-Edwin-Muir)", a nuclear war dirge.

> The radios dumb;<br>
And still they stand in corners of our kitchens,<br>
And stand, perhaps, turned on, in a million rooms<br>
All over the world. But now if they should speak,<br>
If on a sudden they should speak again,<br>
If on the stroke of noon a voice should speak,<br>
We would not listen, we would not let it bring<br>
That old bad world that swallowed its children quick<br>
At one great gulp.

<br> 

"Ah, that's Cronos!" I say. (I'd picked up the myth reading [one](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/490966.Vellum) of my bad fantasy novels.)

"No, it's a _metaphor_ about the Roman god Saturn, who literally ate his own children", teacher.

Thinking himself brave: "I read a story about 'Cronos'. Maybe he's the Greek version? The Romans just nicked all their gods off the Greeks."

"That's right!" said the Greek kid.

"Well, maybe", teacher.

<br><br>

An unremarkable scene... but I remember it quite clearly 15 years later: my school life was thin enough to make it stand out. This is one of the few moments in a decade where the weak cage of authority and rote answers parted, where I formed and voiced a poxy hypothesis of my own and I was (ambiguously) victorious. 

This was the best I could do, not being strong enough yet to just push open the door marked 'Pull' and leave.

<br><br>