---
layout:     post
title:      "Legacy and the memory of legacy"
baselink:   /memoria
permalink:  /memoria
date:       2022-02-20
author:     Gavin   
img:        /img/com.jpg

visible:    1
published:  true

summary:    mocking the ancients and inventing hell
quality:    5
emotion: 	8
confidence: 
importance: 7
wordcount:  300
categories: death, meaning, longtermism
argument:   
---

{%	assign damn="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Damnatio_memoriae"	%}
{%	assign wtb = "https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/33517544-the-will-to-battle" %}
{%	assign flor = "https://www.jstor.org/stable/43446248"	%}
{% 	assign hero = "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Herostratus" 	%}
{% 	assign murder = "https://www.theatlantic.com/national/archive/2014/05/mass-murder-should-not-be-a-ticket-to-fame/371599/"	%}
{%	assign ahk = "https://smarthistory.org/house-altar-depicting-akhenaten-nefertiti-and-three-of-their-daughters/"	%}
{%	assign co = "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Commodus#/media/File:R%C3%B6mermuseum_Osterburken_(DerHexer)_2012-09-30_008.jpg"		%}
{%	assign singer = "https://www.thelifeyoucansave.org/"		%}



A grave punishment in ancient Rome was _<a href="{{damn}}">damnatio memoriae</a>_: being written out of history. Ada Palmer's extremely melodramatic and for all I know accurate <a href="{{wtb}}">portrayal</a>:

> [the damned person is] neither slim nor mighty, stooped nor noble, just a shape... Somewhere in a dusty archive a baptismal registry records some Hildebrand, and, when that dry page molders... I can't look, I can't! Behind the shades, the broad gray plain, that sea of shapeless gloom extending on and on... all forgotten souls, minds empty of memory, smeared one into another... to this absolute dissolution Caesar damns his enemies... Not me! I will never let you take me! I will carve my memory into history, by work, by force, by guile, in swathes of blood and ashes if I must!

<br><a href="{{flor}}">Supposedly</a> this remained an effective policy in the Renaissance:

> In 1343... the Florentine republic that replaced the Duke of Athens ordered all memory of him and his rule erased, and all images and mementos of him destroyed immediately... In addition to the official punishments, a crowd of citizens stormed the government palace in order to
burn archival documents... A crowd also cannibalized two of the duke’s supporters in a particularly brutal form of bodily damnatio memoriae that seems to have emulated
the corpse abuse practised on hated emperors in ancient Rome.


<br>Sometimes people even seem to prefer being <a href="https://www.smbc-comics.com/comic/how-i-was">lied</a> about and demonised to being forgotten.

I cannot understand this at all, and (oddly for me) I don't want to. It just doesn't seem like a big deal. The pain and abuse of power preceding your expurgation is overwhelmingly more important. 

I know why you'd do it to ideological opponents - to hide your crimes, to manage competing ideologies and pre-empt martyrs. So I understand the negationism of Seti and Stalin and the rest. (Actually, how often did it work? <a href="{{hero}}">Lots</a> <a href="{{ahk}}">of damned</a> <a href="{{co}}">people</a> are now more famous than their damners, an ur-Streisand effect. But _maybe_ some cases were done so well that I will never know the numerator here.) 

Then there's a sensible kind, which just <a href="{{hero}}">attempts</a> to remove the incentive for people to commit infamous crimes just for the sake of fame. (Our media <a href="{{murder}}">merrily incentivise murder</a> all the time.)

So I'm instead mocking the reaction of the target to posthumous punishment. Fearing damnatio memoriae is an ultimate kind of wounded pride. Men who appear to value being remembered more than life or anything. This seems related to the naive idea of 'living on' through your descendents.

I want to shake them. "Look man, I know we're all status-obsessed, but some of us try to earn status by doing things. Look man, I know death sucks ass, but using history as a consolation prize is pathetic." 

<br>

---

<br>

My stepfather <a href="#fn:1" id="fnref:1">1</a> died a few years ago. He was a nice man, but comically taciturn. I was a nice lad, but comically shy. We probably had about 5 serious conversations in 5 years. 

One of them concerned his final rest. He told me that he wanted absolutely no monument, no gravestone and no plaque. He told me that it was meaningless and greedy to cling to things when you have no fingers. That he'd had his share of the world. God wasn't in it. When his sons in turn were gone, he wanted to disturb the waters no more. We dumped his ashes - the ashes - at sea.

Let's say he wasn't exceptional in this, that the mania for legacy has declined between Imperium and now. (Rather than being sublimated somehow.) A huge change. Meaning, relocated from public stature to private experience. Status, bounded by one life and one small group of people. Honour, a matter of living peacefully, tidying up after yourself, and turning off the light.

<br>

---

<br>

There is a version of this which would scare me - if anyone ever hated me enough to do it. Call it _damnatio opera_.

This is not the pathetic, primitive damnation of having your name chiselled off plinths and deleted from databases. "Ow my status!!" This is the undoing of everything good you have _done_. Your children eliminated, certainly. But also an unkindness to every person you've been kind to. An opposite murder for every <a href="{{singer}}">life you save</a>. Your parents' pride undone. All your writing, bit-rotted. All your arguments, refuted. All your charity seized. All that you inspired pruned. All happy memories spoiled or repressed.

Maybe people still know that you existed. But so what?

<br>

<div class="footnotes">

<ol>
    <!-- 1 -->
    <li class="footnote" id="fn:1">
    	Something less than a stepfather but more than my mother's boyfriend idk.
    </li>
</ol>

</div>