---
layout:     post
title:      "Great work"
baselink:   /pg
permalink:  /pg
date:       2023-09-01  <!--site.time-->
author:     Gavin

img:        /img/babel.jpg
published:  true
visible:    1
quality:    4
importance: 6

summary:    Some exercises inspired by Paul Graham's schtick
confidence: 70% that the legibilisation will be worth it for you
categories: work, self-help
warnings:   
wordcount:      
---

{%  assign pg = "http://www.paulgraham.com/greatwork.html"    %}
{%  assign bor = "https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/J7nmbqcWncPMZFhGC/want-to-make-a-difference-on-policy-and-governance-become-an"  %}


Like so much of Paul Graham's writing, <a href="{{pg}}">his new piece</a> seems shallow and unsupported on first reading. But there's a great model of the world in it, and rare suitably-hedged advice. You don't need to believe that any of YCombinator's reflected glories are actually glorious to take something from it.

I recently ran a couple of related sessions for my students. (It takes an hour to run the following exercises -- but if you're honest with yourself that's less than it'd take you to read the original.)

<br><br>

* How many areas have you seriously tried working in?
* What haven’t you tried but want to? <a href="#fn:1" id="fnref:1">1</a>
* What are you a natural at?
* What are you excessively curious about?
* What have you mastered? What are the gaps at the frontier of that?
* What would you do in a basic-income world?
* If you took a break from "serious" work to work on something interesting, what would you do? 
* What _intersections_ of things have you mastered? <a href="#fn:3" id="fnref:3">3</a> Anything <a href="{{bor}}">specific and boring</a>?
* What is the hardest you have ever worked without an external deadline?
* How many independent projects have you done? (No teacher, no boss, no company, no manager)
* What open questions are you holding in your head right now? Have you actually tried to answer them? <a href="#fn:2" id="fnref:2">2</a>
* What is the most _delighted_ you have been while working?
* Who are you trying to impress? Is that who you should?
* Cultivating luck: how many <a href="https://colah.github.io/personal/micromarriages/">microfounders</a> and <a href="https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/voLJhDWKmiQ4J6pqD/beyond-micromarriages">micromuses</a> are you accruing every day?


<div class="footnotes">

<ol>
    <!-- 1 -->
    <li class="footnote" id="fn:1">
        If nothing pulls you, just keep sampling, go for max diversity and value of information.
    </li>
    <!--  -->
    <li class="footnote" id="fn:2">
        Resolve cycle: try to answer one in 5 mins, right now
    </li>
<!--  -->
    <li class="footnote" id="fn:3">
        (e.g. Computer graphics, e.g. Bioinformatics, e.g. history of mathematics, e.g. )
    </li>
</ol>

</div>

<br><br>