---
layout:     post
title:      "The Shortest Trip"
baselink:   /trip
permalink:  /trip
date:       2023-12-27  <!--site.time-->
author:     Gavin

img:        /img/
published:  false
visible:    1
quality:    2
emotion:    5
importance: 3

summary:    a throwaway philosophy of life
confidence: 
categories: 
warnings:   
wordcount:      
---

The videogame "[Shortest Trip to Earth](https://shortesttriptoearth.fandom.com/wiki/Shortest_Trip_to_Earth_Wiki)" has unusually good writing. It captures a kind of 1960s SF wonder (and horniness) which its obvious inspiration "FTL" doesn't. The game is by a tiny studio - I think one guy, [Edvin Aedma](https://et.wikipedia.org/wiki/Edvin_Aedma), wrote basically all of it.

Its achievement is to encapsulate the science hippie vibe (think Sagan or Gleick). The good parts of the overall sickly New Age attitude. It's still a bit clunky and naive but it still moved me.

<br>

> "The causal chain reaction": Years ago, you helped somebody, changing their life forever. It started a chain-reaction of events that led to somebody helping you today.

> "The seeds of generosity": By sowing the seeds of generosity, you have arrived to the harvest of abundance.

> "The friend of truth": Awareness of your personal limitations has granted you an even deeper awareness of your freedom

> "The focused one": you understand something so deeply that it allows you to understand everything a bit better than individuals usually do.

> "The masterful exister": Random coincidences seem to support the fulfillment of your wishes more than what is usually considered normal

> "The Great Peace": you're startting to realise your intimate connection with the Great Peace, remaining calm even in situations of utter distress.

> "The optimality": you are in the right place at the right time

> "The taste of victory": those who know what awaits them at the end of the road can enjoy the road better



There are funny descriptions of which drugs your crew are using in the message log - completely ephemeral and difficult to catch. The hand weapons all have little funny descriptions, like the handgun with an onboard AI which prevents firing if there's a civilian lined up.
