---
layout:     post
title:      "Glasgow"
baselink:   /glesga
permalink:  /glesga
date:       2024-12-12
author:     Gavin   
img:        /img/

visible:    1
published:  false
quality:    

summary:    My second alma mater
confidence: 
importance: 3
wordcount:  
categories: places, lists
where:      "Tallinn"
---

> Here's the bird that never flew;<br>Here's the tree that never grew;<br>Here's the fish that never swam;<br>Here's the bell that never rang.

<br>

* 3 years. I learned to code here, and spent a couple years. At the time, the head of department was the formidable Chris Johnson, now chief scientific advisor.

* Glasgow has the most asabiyah of any place I ever lived. Which is strange when you consider that there is still an ancient smouldering faux-religious spat in it, and that _most_ schools were still fully segregated by faith as recently as the 1980s.

* It's somehow the artiest place in Scotland _and_ the most violent and demotic. The humour and antipretension can border on crab-bucket-repressive though.


* **Art**: Alasdair Gray. (Rennie MacIntosh is a great writer and a distinctive draughtsman, but monotonous.)

* **Poet**: 

* **Novelist**: Alasdair Gray.

* **Play**: 

* **Art music**: Craig Armstrong? Glasgow Improvisers Orchestra. Harry Gorski-Brown

* **Popular music**: Arab Strap, Belle and Sebastian, Delgados, Vaselines, Mogwai

* **Venue**: Mono

* **Philosopher**: Alexander Broadie?

* **Scientist**: Joseph Black

* **Eccentric**: 

* **Walk**: west hills over loch

* **Comedian**: Limmy. Rab Florence? Armando Iannucci

* **Director**: Bill Forsyth. Lynne Ramsay

* **Film**: Under the Skin.

* **TV**: Still Game. Burnistoun? VideoGaiden?

* **Actor**: 

* **Videogame**: 

* **Entrepreneur**: 

* **Restaurant**: Mono. (Oddly the Rishi's is nowhere near as good as the Aberdeen one.)

* **Building**: 

* **Church**: the Gurdwara is garish but impressive

* **Library**: Grand checkered one near Partick. The Anniesland Library has impressive security shutters - blast doors. But it's too small to be lovely.

* **Bookshop**: 

* **Cafe**: 

