

Table 1 does not allow us to assert that aid ‘works’ in the full transformative sense; the evidence is too weak and too mixed. But it does entail that abolitionism is not warranted given the current evidence – and, further, that the evidence that aid <i>can</i> be improved is strong. If the abolitionists outlined above are guilty of anything, it is overstatement, and not the avarice that we might have expected from anti-aid economists. Aid has been ripe for criticism. Easterly’s quip – that “critics are better for foreign aid than apologists” – is substantially correct.157 But (to take another slogan) abolitionists have opted for the wrong prong of “end it or mend it”: the abuses, difficulties and ambiguities of the aid process compel us to mend it. 

We saw that Bauer identified a number of abiding problems with aid, but that his extreme neoliberalism is misleading as to aid’s actual impact and prospects. Easterly – who is not really an abolitionist, despite his bark – fared better, but was seen to generalise and omit the upside of C20th aid. Moyo repeated Bauer’s claims in simplified form; cherry-picked and contradictory as it is, her case is more easily deflected. Hayter’s principled attack on aid was seen to focus on motives rather than impact, and have been based in a very different economic order. All of them avoided discussing NGO aid – perhaps due to its relative efficiency. My own analysis suggested that strong conceptual arguments against aid are let down by weak evidence; that aid works to an extent, though not nearly as well as it should; and that its historical results deserve opprobrium. 

Bauer is right to insist that all properly motivated aid workers must be long-term abolitionists: aid should aim to negate itself. While development is neither necessary nor sufficient to develop LDCs; while, to date, development aid has not worked efficiently or without side-effects, there is reason enough to continue. It is possible that the worst shortcoming of aid – one understandably overlooked by the abolitionists – is its being insufficiently supplied to date.
